# Wiznet w5300 for Enterprise-128

WizNet w5300 application notes for Enterprise-128 Z80 based computer.
Written by: LGB Gabor Lenart

http://xep128.lgb.hu

## Preface

This file is part of the Xep128 project, though _this_ text file
can be treated as "public domain" without any actual copyright.
The Xep128 project itself is GNU/GPL licensed.
(However it's always nice to give some credits)

Please not that this writing may be _NOT_ correct. I do not
take any responsibility about the issues, nothing at all.
Though I would be happy to get feedbacks, even pointing
some mistakes out in my writing.

My test program: https://github.com/lgblgblgb/xep128/blob/master/doc/irclet.asm

As a raw text file (can be assembled with sjasm 0.42c): https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lgblgblgb/xep128/master/doc/irclet.asm

Note: my test program would require w5300 at port 0x90!
See later about this topic.

Official specification: http://www.mct.de/download/wiznet/w5300.pdf

Nothing is wrong about the specification, but it's quite long,
and I would like focus on the project now, not about w5300
in general, touching all aspects.

## The Wiznet w5300

w5300 is a "hardware TCP/IP chip" used to connect low-power
MCUs etc (which does not want - or cannot - implement a TCP/IP
stack by its own) to the Ethernet network. That is, compared
with other products like Microchip's ENC28J60, it also does
the bulk of the TCP/IP protocol, not just dealing with ethernet
frames (but you can use w5300 in raw mode, when you implement
your own TCP/IP implementation if you need this). w5300 has
some kind of embedded MCU (?) but it's "hidden" for us. w5300
has even 128K on-board memory, but it's cannot be accessed
directly from outside only through "FIFO registers". w5300
knows about direct and indirect mode, with 8 or 16 bit wide
data bus mode.

w5300 supports 8 concurrent connections called "sockets".
Each of these sockets have didicated I/O ports to control,
query etc the connection state, and so on.

## Emulation in Xep128

The Xep128 emulation of w5300 is VERY limited. I didn't want
to implement TCP/IP by my own so I use the host OS (the OS
which runs the Xep128 emulator, ie Linux or Windows for example)
does the TCP/IP. This cause many limitations though:

+ raw mode is not supported, only TCP or UDP sockets
+ ICMP is also not supported, it can require additional
  privilege from the applicaton (Xep128, I mean) on the host OS
+ local ports cannot be used as-is, as it can collide with
  ports used by the host OS, thus Xep128 does not pass the real
  local ports specified by w5300 settings
+ IP settings are ignored for real, as the host OS uses its
  own IP settings already!
+ things like timeouts, restransmittion, keep-alive etc
  are not used as dictated by w5300 settings at all
+ listening sockets are not implemented currently! it can
  be done (but for example it can collide with host OS ports,
  and also some OSes have limitation on usuable listing ports
  because of security reasons, eg UNIX-like OSes does not allow
  user programs to listen on ports below 1024).
+ MAC address is not used set by w5300 of course
+ PPPoE is not supported at all

So, under Xep128 emulation an EP software would work which
does not even set IP/MAC config up. But note; it would NOT
work on the real hardware!

Other limitations:

+ Direct access is not supported only indirect (but it also true for the hw project)
+ 8 bit bus mode is supported, 16 bit is not (but it also true for the hw project)
+ memory management of w5300 is not emulated

## Specification

Enterprise-128 + WizNet w5300 project ("the project" from now)
uses w5300 in indirect access mode with 8 bit data bus.
The specification itself contain nice draft-like schematics on
the hardware side.

Bus width mode is set "by hardware" (ie via a pin of w5300) and
it cannot be changed.

Indirect access mode requires 6 I/O ports. For the address
decoding most of us would treat as 8 I/O ports then though.
Note: indirect/direct access mode can be set via software.
So, one of the first things to set this, see RESET.

W5300 registers are 16 bit wide, and mainly optimized for
16 bit usage and I/O. But you can use it in 8 bit mode. Care
must be taken, as w5300 byte order IS THE OPPOSITE OF the one
used by Z80 or by x86 CPUs for example. The byte order - in
theory - can be configured, but it's mostly for 16 bit bus
mode, and according the specification "it is not valid" in
8 bit bus mode. So for I/O ports, usually the first byte
is the HIGH byte, and the second one is the LOW. Usually a
register name like "MR" is often named as "MR0" which is
actually the HIGH byte of MR, and "MR1", which is the LOW byte.
And as I've written, MR0 is at first (HIGH byte).

Both direct and indirect access mode implies having the
MR register at the IO BASE (where w5300 is decoded too). Since
direct/indirect access mode is software configurable, and MR
register is "always there", it cannot be a problem.

### RESET

w5300 does not have power-on-RESET at all, thus, a RESET
signal must be fed. Or you can use software initiated RESET.

(For I/O map and MR, see the next chapter)

Bit7 of MR1 can be set to '1' which causes w5300 to reset.
It will clear the bit, so maybe you should wait for that even,
that reset is completed. If you want to handle the situation
where no w5300 really exists, it can be a good idea to use
some kind of timing out strategy so your wait for reset task
won't stuck then forever. After reset, the firt thing you
want is to set indirect access mode, to be able to access
other registers than MR (see next chapter about the indirect
access).

So basically, you may want the following RESET strategy:

* Set RESET bit (bit7 of MR1)
* Wait for RESET bit cleared (bit7 of MR1), probably using a timeout value for error handling
* if OK: Set indirect bit (and possibly others if you need)
  bit0 of MR1 should be set for indirect mode

Optinally you can read 16 bit mode selection (read-only bit)
but probably you can't event reset w5300 via software if it's
wrong, as it's a hardware-level setting.

Waiting for reset bit clear is a rudimentary w5300 detection
as simply having something (or the stray bus) producing always
0 at postition of bit 7 will casuse to think as "successfully"
reset. So the next thing you should do is really test if w5300
presents, but even for that reset and indirect mode setting must
be done first.

Note: it seems Wiznet's AVR demo sources use the method to
wait 5msecs after resest. I am not sure if reset bit clear by
w5300 is OK to check then. Maybe the best method is to
combine these: require rest, then wait for at least 5msecs
then checking reset bit was clear.

### INDIRECT ACCESS and I/O map on EP

So, the I/O ports in indirect + 8 bit mode, from the view pont of
EP (IOB is the IO base, so the IO port where w5300 is
decoded):

  IOB+0	MR0, HIGH byte of MR
  IOB+1	MR1, LOW byte of MR
  IOB+2	IDM_AR0, HIGH byte of IDM_AR
  IOB+3	IDM_AR1, LOW byte of IDM_AR
  IOB+4	IDM_DR0, HIGH byte of IDM_DR
  IOB+5	IDM_DR1, LOW byte of IDM_DR

Accessing MR is "direct", but any other register needs indirect
access in this mode, by sepcifying the register number in IDM_AR
to be set, and then read or write the data (IDM_DR register).

Register numbers set in IDM_AR should have lowest bit CLEAR all
the time (actually it is IGNORED by w5300). This is because
w5300 basically a 16 bit system. Thus, if you want to access
register "5", the method should be set IDM_AR to 4 (!). Then
IDM_DR0 would mean "4" and IDM_DR1 is "5", so you are interested in IDM_DR1
part of IDM_DR. If you want to access register 4, you still need
to set IDM_AR to 4, but then IDM_DR0 is "4" for reading/writing.

Setting "IDM_AR to 4" means - of course - setting IDM_AR0 to
0 (high byte of 4) and IDM_AR1 to 4 (low byte of 4).

### HEADACHES

There are several points where I don't see the exact behaviour
clearly. Maybe this is only my lazyness to read that specification
more carefully (RTFM ...) though. Let's see:

w5300 is basically seems to be word (16 bit) organized even
in 8 bit mode. The specification brings example for 8 bit mode
and it always says to set REG (16 bit) as set REG0 first
(high byte of REG) and then REG1 (low byte of REG). However
what's happen if you only do with REG0 or REG1?

As I can imagine, in 8 bit mode there is a latch in w5300
which is filled on reading, thus then you can read high
or low bytes of the value. But I can't be sure it works
this way. For writing this is even more complex issue:
can a 16 bit ingernal register written with only a half?
Specification examples do this setting REG0 first then
REG1. What happens if I only write one of them?

This is even a question for MR, which is not an indirect access
register.

Also for IDM_AR, can I set the address with only a byte, since
- let's say - the previous high byte is the same? Another
question: can I read/write IDM_DR without re-setting the IDM_AR
since the same register is used? I guess, yes, but I can't be
sure.

To overcome these problems, currently I always set address in
IDM_AR for both of bytes, then always read or write IDM_DR
in the IDM_DR0 then IDM_DR1 order. However, for performance
readons, it's not so ideal for future network capable
softwares written for EP.

### IOB: IO BASE

Of course you must to know where  I/O ports for MR, IDM_AR
and IDM_DR is assigned to your Enterprise. In Xep128 emulator
of mine it is fixed from port 0x90. However Bruce told
me that his hardware project won't use a fixed address,
thus you can:

+ scan EP _memory_ segments from ROM signature, and I/O
  base will be the _half_ of the ROM segment number

+ maybe later some kind of EXOS functionality will be
  provided to simply ask the address from the OS (EXOS),
  suggested by myself

If there is a real hardware Xep128 will be modified to
use a similar scheme and not a fixed I/O base, of course.
Currently, Xep128 does not contain any EXOS_ROM just
the "bare hardware". Ideally, the ROM should know how
to set up IP, MAC, initialize/detec/reset w5300 etc,
so you can treat w5300 as initialized with the proper
settings, and not every software written for this project
need to set it up as its own.

### DETECTING

W5300 has the IDR register, which can be used to identify
the w5300 really exists. Since the IDR register itself
cannot be accessed directly in indirect mode (of course),
detection can't be the first, you should try to reset
w5300 first and put into indirect mode, otherwise you may
not find it at all, since w5300 can be in direct mode
which is not supported then by the hardware configuration
used in our project.

IDR should be read as 0x5300 if w5300 presents in the system.
IDR register is at 0xFE. So you need:

* set IDM_AR to 0xFE, thus IDM_AR0 to zero, and IDM_AR1 is to 0xFE
* read IDM_DR, thus reading IDM_DR0 and IDM_DR1
  IDM_DR should be 0x5300, thus IDM_DR0=0x53 and IDM_DR1=0x00
  any other value means no w5300, bad hardware, or not
  configured indirect mode, etc etc.

### BASIC IP/NET SETUP

Setting IP related configuration is probably the first
thing you want to do after reset and detection. In any case,
you can further improve your detection by checking all the
written values with reading back. It's not needed by
specification or such, just I do it for being sure and
discover possible bugs in software and/or hardware anyway.
In production it even makes the software slower!

w5300 supports PPPoE (PPP over ethernet). I don't need
this one, maybe you need it if you want to put your EP
onto ADSL (if it uses PPPoE) directly without a router, or such? What
I want to use is "simple" ethernet LAN solution, where
"internet" can be accessed via the default gateway, which
is some kind of router.

w5300 does not have pre-set MAC address, you need to set it
after reset. MAC addresses should be word-wide unique so
care must be taken, also if you write software with a given
MAC address hard-wired, you may have problem when you have
an Enterprise-128 party :) with more machines with the same
software as colliding MAC addresses. Ideally, if EP has
ROM for the project it should be done with different ROM
images for all ROMs produced to have different MACs. Also
a MAC address space should be used not to collide with
other ethernet products!

After setting MAC address up, you need to configure the
IP (IPv4) address of the default gateway (ie the "router"),
the network subnet mask (that is 255.255.255.0 for /24 for
example) and our own IP address will be used. Note: it
would be great to use DHCP, so EP can ask these settings
(of course, the MAC address cannot be asked, that is something
you need to take care about!), at least if you have DHCP
server (the router itself, probably, in a home network).
Decent software may need to allow user to set "static IP"
or DHCP (when you need to contruct DHCP request, to have
the IP settings you can use then).

MAC address can be set via the "SHAR" registers, 
from SHAR0 ... SHAR5 (6 bytes) from register address
8, that is set IDM_AR0 to zero (high byte of 8) and
IDM_AR1 to 8 (low byte of 8).

Thus, in indirect mode, you need to set address 8,
then use IDM_DR0 to set the first byte of the MAC address,
and IDM_DR1 to set the second byte. Then you need to
set address 10, and use IDM_DR0 to set third, and IDM_DR1 to
set fourth byte of MAC. And so on. You can see the
idea, that w5300 is basically 16 bit oriented stuff even
in 8 bit mode.

IP related config is similar, but it's only 4 bytes,
but the process is basically the same.

From register address 0x10 you need to set the
gateway IP address ("GAR"), from 0x14 the subnet mask
("SUBR"), and from 0x18 the source IP ("SIPR") which
is "our IP address" basically.

### MEMORY MANAGEMENT

w5300 has its own 128K of memory. For each sockets
you can configure how much RX (receiving) and TX
(transmitting) buffer is assigned from this memory
space. Honestly, till now, I don't care about too
much on this. The default setting after reset seems
to be OK for the first steps (8K for every sockets
for both of TX and RX).

### SOCKET / COMMON registers

Registers between 0 ... 0xFF are called "common
registers", like with SHAR to set MAC address, etc.

At range of 0xFF ... 0x1FF there is an "unused gap" in
the register map. 

At range of 0x200 ... 0x3FF you can find the "SOCKET
registers", 0x40 bytes for each of the 8 sockets.

0x3FF is the last register in the w5300 register map.

That is:

0x0 - 0xFF:	COMMON registers, like SHAR (note, 0-1 is unused!)
0x100-0x1FF:	UNUSED
0x200-0x3FF:	SOCKET registers:
		0x200 - 0x23F	SOCKET0 registers
		0x240 - 0x27F	SOCKET1 registers
		0x280 - 0x2BF	SOCKET2 registers
		0x2C0 - 0x2FF	SOCKET3 registers
		0x300 - 0x33F	SOCKET4 registers
		0x340 - 0x37F	SOCKET5 registers
		0x380 - 0x3BF	SOCKET6 registers
		0x3C0 - 0x3FF	SOCKET7 registers


For common registers we used some like SHAR, there are
more, with different feature, even like interrupt control
(w5300 can notify the host with an interrupt so it does
not need to polling).

### SOCKET registers

As we have 8 range of 0x40 wide register area for each
of the 8 sockets, we need only talk about a single one,
let's say SOCKET0. Of course the same (with adjusted addresses
of course) would apply for other sockets as well.

Generally socket register names like this:

S0_MR	which means socket0's MR.
	Of course it's two bytes in 8 bit mode, ie:
	S0_MR0 and S0_MR1

Do not be confused, S1_MR0 is the first (high) byte of MR for
S1 (socket1) where S0_MR1 is the second (low) byte of MR for
S0 (socket0). And so on. Now only about socket0 (S0_...) registers
which should be meant for other sockets as well with the
same layout:

Addr.   Name(for 16bit) Names for "8 bit slices"
~~~~~   ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
0x200	S0_MR		S0_MR0	S0_MR1
0x202	S0_CR		S0_CR0	S0_CR1
0x204	S0_IMR		
0x206	S0_IR
0x208	S0_SSR
0x20A	S0_PORTR
0x20C	S0_DHAR		S0_DHAR0 S0_DHAR1
0x20E	S0_DHAR2	S0_DHAR2 S0_DHAR3
0x210	S0_SHAR4	S0_SHAR4 S0_SHAR5
	DHAR*: Destination hardware (ie: MAC) address


For sure (as written about) this table should be interpreted
with addresses from 0x240 and names S1_... for socket1, and so on.



